README.md, before:

[![Cult Of Martians](http://cultofmartians.com/assets/badges/badge.svg)](http://cultofmartians.com)
[![Gem Version](https://badge.fury.io/rb/anyway_config.svg)](https://rubygems.org/gems/anyway_config) [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/palkan/anyway_config.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/palkan/anyway_config)

# Anyway Config

Rails/Ruby plugin/application configuration tool which allows you to load parameters from different sources: YAML, Rails secrets, environment.

Allows you to easily follow the [twelve-factor application](https://12factor.net/config) principles and adds zero complexity to your development process.

Libraries using Anyway Config:

- [Influxer](https://github.com/palkan/influxer)

- [AnyCable](https://github.com/anycable/anycable)

- [Sniffer](https://github.com/aderyabin/sniffer)

- [Blood Contracts](https://github.com/sclinede/blood_contracts)

- [and others](https://github.com/palkan/anyway_config/network/dependents).

## Installation

1) Adding to a gem:

```ruby
# my-cool-gem.gemspec
Gem::Specification.new do |spec|
  # ...
  spec.add_dependency "anyway_config", "~> 2.0"
  # ...
end
```

2) Adding to your project:

```ruby
# Gemfile
gem "anyway_config", "~> 2.0"
```

3) Install globally:

```sh
$ gem install anyway_config
```

## Usage

### Pre-defined configuration

Create configuration class:

```ruby
require "anyway"

module MyCoolGem
  class Config < Anyway::Config
    attr_config user: "root", password: "root", host: "localhost"
  end
end
```

`attr_config` creates accessors and default values. If you don't need default values just write:

```ruby
attr_config :user, :password, host: "localhost", options: {}
```

Then create an instance of the config class and use it:

```ruby
module MyCoolGem
  def self.config
    @config ||= Config.new
  end
end

MyCoolGem.config.user #=> "root"
```

#### Config name

Anyway Config relies on the notion of _config name_ to populate data.

By default, Anyway Config uses the config class name to infer the config name using the following rules:
- if the class name has a form of `<Module>::Config` then use the module name (`SomeModule::Config => "somemodule"`)
- if the class name has a form of `<Something>Config` then use the class name prefix (`SomeConfig => "some"`)

**NOTE:** in both cases the config name is a **downcased** module/class prefix, not underscored.

You can also specify the config name explicitly (it's required in cases when you class name doesn't match any of the patterns above):

```ruby
module MyCoolGem
  class Config < Anyway::Config
    config_name :cool
    attr_config user: "root", password: "root", host: "localhost", options: {}
  end
end
```

#### Customize env variable names prefix

By default, Anyway Config uses upcased config name as a prefix for env variable names (e.g.
`config_name :my_app` will result to parsing `MY_APP_` prefix).

You can set env prefix explicitly:

```ruby
module MyCoolGem
  class Config < Anyway::Config
    config_name :cool_gem
    env_prefix :really_cool # now variables, starting wih `REALLY_COOL_`, will be parsed
    attr_config user: "root", password: "root", host: "localhost", options: {}
  end
end
```

#### Provide explicit values

Sometimes it's useful to set some parameters explicitly during config initialization.
You can do that using `overrides` option:

```ruby
config = MyCoolGem::Config.new(
  overrides: {
    user: "john",
    password: "rubyisnotdead"
  }
)

# The value would not be overriden from other sources (such as YML file, env)
config.user == "john"
```

### Dynamic configuration

You can also create configuration objects without pre-defined schema (just like `Rails.application.config_for` but more [powerful](#railsapplicationconfig_for-vs-anywayconfigfor)):

```ruby
# load data from config/my_app.yml, secrets.my_app (if using Rails), ENV["MY_APP_*"]
# MY_APP_VALUE=42
config = Anyway::Config.for(:my_app)
config.value #=> 42
```

### Using with Rails

**NOTE:** version 2.x supports Rails >= 5.0; for Rails 4.x use version 1.x of the gem.

Your config will be filled up with values from the following sources (ordered by priority from low to high):

- `RAILS_ROOT/config/my_cool_gem.yml` (for the current `RAILS_ENV`, supports `ERB`):

```yml
test:
  host: localhost
  port: 3002

development:
  host: localhost
  port: 3000
```

- `Rails.application.secrets.my_cool_gem` (if `secrets.yml` present):

```yml
# config/secrets.yml
development:
  my_cool_gem:
    port: 4444
```

- `Rails.application.credentials` (if supported):

```yml
my_cool_gem:
  host: secret.host
```

- `ENV['MYCOOLGEM_*']`.

### Using with Ruby

When you're using Anyway Config in non-Rails environment, we're looking for a YANL config file
at `./config/<config-name>.yml`.

You can override this setting through special environment variable – 'MYGEM_CONF' – containing the path to the YAML file.

**NOTE:** in pure Ruby apps we have no knowledge of _environments_ (`test`, `development`, `production`, etc.); thus we assume that the YAML contains values for a single environment:

```yml
host: localhost
port: 3000
```

Environmental variables work the same way as with Rails.


### Reload configuration

There are `#clear` and `#reload` methods which do exactly what they state.

Note: `#reload` also accepts `overrides` key to provide explicit values (see above).

### OptionParser integration

It's possible to use config as option parser (e.g. for CLI apps/libraries). It uses
[`optparse`](https://ruby-doc.org/stdlib-2.5.1/libdoc/optparse/rdoc/OptionParser.html) under the hood.

Example usage:

```ruby
class MyConfig < Anyway::Config
  attr_config :host, :log_level, :concurrency, :debug, server_args: {}

  # specify which options shouldn't be handled by option parser
  ignore_options :server_args

  # provide description for options
  describe_options(
    concurrency: "number of threads to use"
  )

  # mark some options as flag
  flag_options :debug

  # extend an option parser object (i.e. add banner or version/help handlers)
  extend_options do |parser, config|
    parser.banner = "mycli [options]"

    parser.on("--server-args VALUE") do |value|
      config.server_args = JSON.parse(value)
    end

    parser.on_tail "-h", "--help" do
      puts parser
    end
  end
end

config = MyConfig.new

config.parse_options!(%w[--host localhost --port 3333 --log-level debug])

config.host # => "localhost"
config.port # => 3333
config.log_level # => "debug"

# Get the instance of OptionParser
config.option_parser
```

## `Rails.application.config_for` vs `Anyway::Config.for`

Rails 4.2 introduced new feature: `Rails.application.config_for`. It looks very similar to
`Anyway::Config.for`, but there are some differences:

| Feature       | Rails         | Anyway Config |
| ------------- |:-------------:| -----:|
| load data from `config/app.yml`     | yes | yes |
| load data from `secrets`      | no      |   yes |
| load data from `credentials`  | no      |   yes |
| load data from environment | no   |   yes |
| return Hash with indifferent access | no | yes |
| support ERB within `config/app.yml` | yes | yes* |
| raise errors if file doesn't exist | yes | no |

<sub><sup>*</sup>make sure that ERB is loaded</sub>

But the main advantage of Anyway::Config is that it can be used [without Rails](#using-with-ruby)!)

## How to set env vars

Environmental variables for your config should start with your config name, uppercased.

For example, if your config name is "mycoolgem" then the env var "MYCOOLGEM_PASSWORD" is used as `config.password`.

Environment variables are automatically serialized:
- `"True"`, `"t"` and `"yes"` to `true`;
- `"False"`, `"f"` and `"no"` to `false`;
- `"nil"` and `"null"` to `nil` (do you really need it?);
- `"123"` to 123 and `"3.14"` to 3.14.

*Anyway Config* supports nested (_hashed_) env variables. Just separate keys with double-underscore.

For example, "MYCOOLGEM_OPTIONS__VERBOSE" is parsed as `config.options["verbose"]`.

Array values are also supported:

```ruby
# Suppose ENV["MYCOOLGEM_IDS"] = '1,2,3'
config.ids #=> [1,2,3]
```

If you want to provide a text-like env variable which contains commas then wrap it into quotes:

```ruby
MYCOOLGEM = "Nif-Nif, Naf-Naf and Nouf-Nouf"
```

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/palkan/anyway_config.

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

Commit message:

feat: add local config files support

README.md, after:

[![Cult Of Martians](http://cultofmartians.com/assets/badges/badge.svg)](http://cultofmartians.com)
[![Gem Version](https://badge.fury.io/rb/anyway_config.svg)](https://rubygems.org/gems/anyway_config) [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/palkan/anyway_config.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/palkan/anyway_config)

# Anyway Config

Rails/Ruby plugin/application configuration tool which allows you to load parameters from different sources: YAML, Rails secrets, environment.

Allows you to easily follow the [twelve-factor application](https://12factor.net/config) principles and adds zero complexity to your development process.

Libraries using Anyway Config:

- [Influxer](https://github.com/palkan/influxer)

- [AnyCable](https://github.com/anycable/anycable)

- [Sniffer](https://github.com/aderyabin/sniffer)

- [Blood Contracts](https://github.com/sclinede/blood_contracts)

- [and others](https://github.com/palkan/anyway_config/network/dependents).

## Installation

1) Adding to a gem:

```ruby
# my-cool-gem.gemspec
Gem::Specification.new do |spec|
  # ...
  spec.add_dependency "anyway_config", "~> 2.0"
  # ...
end
```

2) Adding to your project:

```ruby
# Gemfile
gem "anyway_config", "~> 2.0"
```

3) Install globally:

```sh
$ gem install anyway_config
```

## Usage

### Pre-defined configuration

Create configuration class:

```ruby
require "anyway"

module MyCoolGem
  class Config < Anyway::Config
    attr_config user: "root", password: "root", host: "localhost"
  end
end
```

`attr_config` creates accessors and default values. If you don't need default values just write:

```ruby
attr_config :user, :password, host: "localhost", options: {}
```

Then create an instance of the config class and use it:

```ruby
module MyCoolGem
  def self.config
    @config ||= Config.new
  end
end

MyCoolGem.config.user #=> "root"
```

#### Config name

Anyway Config relies on the notion of _config name_ to populate data.

By default, Anyway Config uses the config class name to infer the config name using the following rules:
- if the class name has a form of `<Module>::Config` then use the module name (`SomeModule::Config => "somemodule"`)
- if the class name has a form of `<Something>Config` then use the class name prefix (`SomeConfig => "some"`)

**NOTE:** in both cases the config name is a **downcased** module/class prefix, not underscored.

You can also specify the config name explicitly (it's required in cases when you class name doesn't match any of the patterns above):

```ruby
module MyCoolGem
  class Config < Anyway::Config
    config_name :cool
    attr_config user: "root", password: "root", host: "localhost", options: {}
  end
end
```

#### Customize env variable names prefix

By default, Anyway Config uses upcased config name as a prefix for env variable names (e.g.
`config_name :my_app` will result to parsing `MY_APP_` prefix).

You can set env prefix explicitly:

```ruby
module MyCoolGem
  class Config < Anyway::Config
    config_name :cool_gem
    env_prefix :really_cool # now variables, starting wih `REALLY_COOL_`, will be parsed
    attr_config user: "root", password: "root", host: "localhost", options: {}
  end
end
```

#### Provide explicit values

Sometimes it's useful to set some parameters explicitly during config initialization.
You can do that using `overrides` option:

```ruby
config = MyCoolGem::Config.new(
  overrides: {
    user: "john",
    password: "rubyisnotdead"
  }
)

# The value would not be overriden from other sources (such as YML file, env)
config.user == "john"
```

### Dynamic configuration

You can also create configuration objects without pre-defined schema (just like `Rails.application.config_for` but more [powerful](#railsapplicationconfig_for-vs-anywayconfigfor)):

```ruby
# load data from config/my_app.yml, secrets.my_app (if using Rails), ENV["MY_APP_*"]
# MY_APP_VALUE=42
config = Anyway::Config.for(:my_app)
config.value #=> 42
```

### Using with Rails

**NOTE:** version 2.x supports Rails >= 5.0; for Rails 4.x use version 1.x of the gem.

Your config will be filled up with values from the following sources (ordered by priority from low to high):

- `RAILS_ROOT/config/my_cool_gem.yml` (for the current `RAILS_ENV`, supports `ERB`):

```yml
test:
  host: localhost
  port: 3002

development:
  host: localhost
  port: 3000
```

**NOTE:** you can override the default YML lookup path by setting `MYCOOLGEM_CONF` env variable.

- `Rails.application.secrets.my_cool_gem` (if `secrets.yml` present):

```yml
# config/secrets.yml
development:
  my_cool_gem:
    port: 4444
```

- `Rails.application.credentials` (if supported):

```yml
my_cool_gem:
  host: secret.host
```

- `ENV['MYCOOLGEM_*']`.

### Using with Ruby

When you're using Anyway Config in non-Rails environment, we're looking for a YANL config file
at `./config/<config-name>.yml`.

You can override this setting through special environment variable – 'MYCOOLGEM_CONF' – containing the path to the YAML file.

**NOTE:** in pure Ruby apps we have no knowledge of _environments_ (`test`, `development`, `production`, etc.); thus we assume that the YAML contains values for a single environment:

```yml
host: localhost
port: 3000
```

Environmental variables work the same way as with Rails.

### Local files

It's useful to have personal, user-specific configuration in development, which extends the project-wide one.

We support this by looking at _local_ files when loading the configuration data:
- `<config_name>.local.yml` files (next to\* the _global_ `<config_name>.yml`)
- `config/credentials/local.yml.enc` (for Rails >= 6, generate it via `rails credentials:edit --environment local`).

\* If the YAML config path is not default (i.e. set via `<CONFIG_NAME>_CONF`), we lookup the local
config at this location, too.

Local configs are meant for using in development and only loaded if `Anyway::Settings.use_local_files` is `true` (which is true by default if `RACK_ENV` or `RAILS_ENV` env variable is equal to `"development"`).

Don't forget to add `*.local.yml` (and `config/credentials/local.*`) to your `.gitignore`.

**NOTE:** local YAML configs for Rails app must be environment-free (i.e. you shouldn't have top-level `development:` key).

### Reload configuration

There are `#clear` and `#reload` methods which do exactly what they state.

Note: `#reload` also accepts `overrides` key to provide explicit values (see above).

### OptionParser integration

It's possible to use config as option parser (e.g. for CLI apps/libraries). It uses
[`optparse`](https://ruby-doc.org/stdlib-2.5.1/libdoc/optparse/rdoc/OptionParser.html) under the hood.

Example usage:

```ruby
class MyConfig < Anyway::Config
  attr_config :host, :log_level, :concurrency, :debug, server_args: {}

  # specify which options shouldn't be handled by option parser
  ignore_options :server_args

  # provide description for options
  describe_options(
    concurrency: "number of threads to use"
  )

  # mark some options as flag
  flag_options :debug

  # extend an option parser object (i.e. add banner or version/help handlers)
  extend_options do |parser, config|
    parser.banner = "mycli [options]"

    parser.on("--server-args VALUE") do |value|
      config.server_args = JSON.parse(value)
    end

    parser.on_tail "-h", "--help" do
      puts parser
    end
  end
end

config = MyConfig.new

config.parse_options!(%w[--host localhost --port 3333 --log-level debug])

config.host # => "localhost"
config.port # => 3333
config.log_level # => "debug"

# Get the instance of OptionParser
config.option_parser
```

## `Rails.application.config_for` vs `Anyway::Config.for`

Rails 4.2 introduced new feature: `Rails.application.config_for`. It looks very similar to
`Anyway::Config.for`, but there are some differences:

| Feature       | Rails         | Anyway Config |
| ------------- |:-------------:| -----:|
| load data from `config/app.yml`      | yes | yes |
| load data from `secrets`      | no       |   yes |
| load data from `credentials`  | no       |   yes |
| load data from environment    | no       |   yes |
| local config files            | no       |   yes |
| return Hash with indifferent access | no | yes  |
| support ERB within `config/app.yml` | yes | yes* |
| raise errors if file doesn't exist | yes | no |

<sub><sup>*</sup>make sure that ERB is loaded</sub>

But the main advantage of Anyway::Config is that it can be used [without Rails](#using-with-ruby)!)

## How to set env vars

Environmental variables for your config should start with your config name, uppercased.

For example, if your config name is "mycoolgem" then the env var "MYCOOLGEM_PASSWORD" is used as `config.password`.

Environment variables are automatically serialized:
- `"True"`, `"t"` and `"yes"` to `true`;
- `"False"`, `"f"` and `"no"` to `false`;
- `"nil"` and `"null"` to `nil` (do you really need it?);
- `"123"` to 123 and `"3.14"` to 3.14.

*Anyway Config* supports nested (_hashed_) env variables. Just separate keys with double-underscore.

For example, "MYCOOLGEM_OPTIONS__VERBOSE" is parsed as `config.options["verbose"]`.

Array values are also supported:

```ruby
# Suppose ENV["MYCOOLGEM_IDS"] = '1,2,3'
config.ids #=> [1,2,3]
```

If you want to provide a text-like env variable which contains commas then wrap it into quotes:

```ruby
MYCOOLGEM = "Nif-Nif, Naf-Naf and Nouf-Nouf"
```

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/palkan/anyway_config.

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).
